A 12-year-old boy opened fire with a shotgun on Tuesday at the middle school he attends in Roswell, N.M., striking two among the dozens of students who were gathered inside a gym waiting for the first bell to ring, the police and witnesses said.

The victims, an 11-year-old boy and a 13-year-old girl, were flown to University Medical Center in Lubbock, Tex., 170 miles east of Roswell. By Tuesday evening, he was listed in critical condition and she was in satisfactory condition, Eric Finley, a hospital spokesman, said.

The boy suspected in the shooting, whom the police did not identify, carried a shotgun inside a band-instrument bag, pulling it out once he entered the gym at Berrendo Middle School about 8:15 a.m. and stood before the first victim, identified by classmates as Nathaniel Tavarez, 11. The other victim, identified by a family friend as Kendal Sanders, 13, was struck in the chest, according to students who were there.

The boy stopped shooting once a social studies teacher told him to, and then he dropped the gun on the floor, police and school officials said. He was apprehended by a State Police lieutenant whom the school’s principal had flagged as she raced to close the main door to the campus during the shooting.

“I believe we have in custody right now the only individual who is responsible for this,” Pete N. Kassetas, the New Mexico State Police chief, said at a news conference in Roswell.

At the same news conference, Gov. Susana Martinez of New Mexico said that a staff member at the school suffered minor injuries as a result of the shooting, but declined medical treatment because he wanted to stay and help.

The boy whom several students identified as the gunman was described as smart and bookish. On Facebook, he was pictured beside a deer he had killed during a hunting trip. (The picture has since been removed.) Laura Folts, 13, an eighth-grade student at Berrendo who worked as an aide to the boy’s second-period language arts teacher, said in an interview that he was “really smart, nice with everyone.”

Chief Kassetas said during the news conference that investigators had interviewed more than 100 students and staff members at the school but had yet to pin down a motive for the shooting.

Students and staff members at Berrendo — on the north end of Roswell, a city of about 48,000 in southeastern New Mexico — had been through several safety drills, and the school also hired its own security staff, said Tom Burris, superintendent of the Roswell Independent School District. According to the parents of current and former students, the school did not have a metal detector.

The school stayed on lockdown for several hours after the shooting, and the police also blocked access to portions of Highway 70, which runs near the campus. Students were taken to a nearby mall, where they were reunited with their families.

Mr. Burris said he had canceled Wednesday’s classes.
