CHARDON, Ohio — The teenager held in a shooting rampage at a high school in a suburb of Cleveland that killed three students and injured two had a troubled past, accused in 2009 of choking and punching a person, according to court documents released here on Wednesday.

The documents state that the 17-year-old student, T. J. Lane, was the focus of a criminal complaint involving a person identified as John Bruening. The complaint, dated Dec. 9, 2009, states that Mr. Lane, who was 15 at the time, placed Mr. Bruening, who was not otherwise identified, “in a choke hold and punched him in the face.”

The assault would have been a misdemeanor of the first degree if committed by an adult, the complaint stated. But Mr. Lane was a juvenile, and it appears from the documents that he was placed in detention for a number of days, in January 2010. The documents also showed a traffic violation.

Mr. Lane came from a broken home. His parents — identified in previous court documents as Sara Nolan and Thomas Lane — never married, and each had domestic assault charges filed against the other during their relationship.

The authorities said Mr. Lane used a .22-caliber Ruger semiautomatic pistol to fire 10 shots at students in the cafeteria and in a hallway at Chardon High School.
Carl Henderson, a neighbor of Mr. Lane’s paternal grandfather, said Mr. Lane had taken the gun from his grandfather’s barn.

Mr. Henderson, a former Geauga County sheriff who retired from police work seven years ago, said that he had known Mr. Lane’s family for 50 years and that Mr. Lane had “never bothered anyone in the community.” He said that it was not unusual for guns to be kept in homes in this area, and that Mr. Lane’s grandfather had a workshop in his barn.
“It’s too bad because no one would ever think something like this would happen,” Mr. Henderson said. “He is a very upstanding citizen,” he added, referring to the grandfather.

The Associated Press, citing a law enforcement official familiar with the investigation, reported that the gun, a Ruger Mark III target pistol, was bought legally in August 2010.

It was purchased at Gander Mountain, a hunting, fishing and outdoor store in Mentor, Ohio. “We are fully cooperating with law enforcement authorities looking into this,” said David Ewald, a spokesman for Gander.

In Chardon on Wednesday, parents and students gathered in small groups near a white gazebo in the town’s central square, where people were leaving notes, flowers and stuffed animals.

Several churches held prayer services, and the City of Chardon set up a fund for donations, the Chardon Healing Fund.
