A 14-year-old boy shot two students at a Canadian high school yesterday, killing one, the police said. It was the most serious of many incidents in which young people have been charged with stockpiling weapons or preparing to use them at their schools after the shooting in Littleton, Colo., last week.

In Taber, Alberta, a town of 8,000 people about an hour's drive north of Montana, the police took a 14-year-old boy into custody after he shot two 11th graders at lunchtime in the W. R. Myers High School, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported. The Associated Press said Lethbridge Regional Hospital had confirmed that one boy was dead and another in surgery.

The CBC reported accounts of students who said the gunman wore a blue trench coat and carried a .22-caliber rifle. The name of the boy in custody was not released.

The Lethbridge Herald quoted students as saying the gunman was a ninth grade student who had dropped out and was being taught at home. ''He said he's been really distressed,'' said one of the students, Matt Anderson. ''He didn't have very many friends.''

In Oak Lawn, Ill., a Chicago suburb, a 15-year-old boy was arrested and charged yesterday with assault and disorderly conduct after an ax, knives, a rifle, shotguns, and 150 rounds of ammunition were reportedly found in his home. A fellow student at South Side Baptist Church School reported overhearing the suspect, who had been suspended, making a threat to blow up the school.

Bob Smith, a police detective, told The Associated Press the department had received information from an Oak Lawn school that threats were made against an administrator, a student and the school involving bombs and ''killing one or two persons with knives and guns.''

In the Central Valley of California, several schools received threats. In Coalinga, one student was arrested for reportedly threatening to burn down the middle school and another for allegedly threatening to blow up the high school. They were booked on charges of making terrorist threats. And in Clovis, Calif., a boy was arrested yesterday for threatening a teacher at Alta Sierra High School.

Yesterday's arrests and threats follow a recent wave of similar incidents around the country.

Pennsylvania officials reported at least 52 bomb scares and other threats at schools in 22 counties. Near Philadelphia, a 16-year-old was reportedly turned in by his mother after he threatened her with a reference to the Littleton tragedy.

Law-enforcement officials later discovered a homemade videotape showing the teen-ager building what appeared to be a bomb.
