Their faces taut and their eyes red, mourners filled the meeting hall at the Springfield Faith Center here today as a stunned and grieving community gathered to mark the death of Benjamin A. Walker, one of two Thurston High School teen-agers killed in a shooting at the school cafeteria last week.

Those who spoke at the 70-minute funeral tried to sketch a portrait of the 16-year-old for the hundreds who had never met him but nonetheless felt the need to mourn his death.

From the beginning, said Ray Trowbridge, the pastor at Calvary Temple, Ben Walker was in a hurry to get on with life, ''and that is why Ben left us early, because he was in a hurry to get on to his next destination.''

Every chair at the Springfield Faith Center was filled. The people inside as well as those who watched on video screens in adjacent rooms and outside the simple one-story building reflected the cross-section of the community that grieved en masse. Among the 500 mourners were teen-age boys with bleached hair, baseball caps and oversize jackets; politicians in somber blue suits; girls with dark lipstick, dressed in black pants and baggy tops; white-haired grandparents and tight-lipped parents.

Intermittent rain ceased for two hours this afternoon, just long enough for light to stream through several small domed windows onto the mourners.

The police say the shooting rampage by one of Mr. Williams's classmates, Kipland P. Kinkel, 15, began on Wednesday evening, with Mr. Kinkel killing his parents, William and Faith Kinkel, at their house. The next morning, the police say, the teen-ager entered the cafeteria of Thurston High School and sprayed 50 rounds from a .22-caliber rifle and one round from a handgun into the crowd of students. Mikael E. Nickolauson, 17, who will be buried on Tuesday, died immediately from gunshot wounds; Ben Walker was pronounced dead about 24 hours later. Twenty-two other students were injured; two remain in critical condition.

About two hours before the service today, a school holiday, the Thurston cafeteria was opened for students and their parents, who entered the school grounds to the sounds of a bagpiper playing ''Amazing Grace.''

Seated at the same spot they occupied when the shootings began, the students wrote their feelings on a long sheet of butcher paper.

''It looked like it was haunted in there,'' Brandon Mainard, 18, told The Associated Press. ''It was dead silent.''

Larry Bentz, Thurston's principal, said that when he first went to the cafeteria, ''I sat in a corner and probably cried for 45 minutes.''

Since the shooting, the national press has descended on this small Oregon city, with satellite trucks and floodlights massing on the usually quiet streets and prompting some officials to complain of insensitive intrusion. Cameras and microphones were barred from today's service, and the flower-filled room became a quiet refuge where mourners could sit and simply be with the grief that has dogged them for four long days.

A family friend, Mike Lujan, read two poems, the second ending with the words,

Don't stand at my grave and cry

For I will not be there.

I did not die.

Mayor Bill Morrisette told the mourners that the only thing that would make this calamity worse would be if nothing came of it.

''We owe it to Ben Walker, and Ben's family, to do something about this,'' he said. And whatever that action may be, he said ''it will be a living memorial to Ben Walker.''

The Mayor also said that living memorials to Ben Walker already existed: the boy's organs were donated to 12 people.

As the service ended, mourners left the church carrying red, yellow and pink carnations. Among them was Representative Peter A. DeFazio, a Democrat who earlier that day had toured the cafeteria and listened to his constituents tell him how badly they were in need of counseling and guidance for troubled teen-agers. The school of 1,400 has about 1 counselor for every 700 students.

''Maybe, just maybe, something good can come out of all this,'' Mr. DeFazio said.
