SEATTLE — Students at Seattle Pacific University gathered on campus Friday in small prayer circles and at large candlelight vigils to mourn the violence that exploded in a science and engineering building, when a young man walked in with a shotgun on Thursday afternoon. One student was killed and two others were wounded. One of them remained hospitalized Friday in serious condition after hours of surgery.

But for some on this deeply religious Christian campus, there was also a tone of quiet celebration, or at least affirmation, of the actions of people who the Seattle police said had stepped into harm’s way and helped subdue the gunman as he stopped to reload. They brought a quick end to a situation that could have become worse by the minute, the police said.

A 22-year-old building monitor and engineering student named Jon Meis led the counterattack, students and responders said, blasting the gunman with pepper spray. Other people then joined in and held the suspect down until police officers arrived.

“I hope I get to meet him someday,” said Josh Palmer, a 21-year-old business major who said he thought the fact that the episode had produced a hero was helping him and other students cope. He added that he thought sales of pepper spray would go up.

Aaron R. Ybarra, 26, who is not a student at the school, was arrested at the scene. The police said Mr. Ybarra had also been carrying a knife and additional ammunition.

A 19-year-old man died on Thursday at Harborview Medical Center, and a 19-year-old woman was upgraded from critical to serious condition on Thursday. The hospital said she was conscious and breathing on her own. Another man, 24, was discharged on Friday, said a hospital spokeswoman, Susan Gregg. The authorities have not released the names of the wounded or dead.

Mr. Meis, who did not respond to a message sent on Facebook, was also taken to the hospital after the attack, Ms. Gregg confirmed on Friday. He was treated and released, she said.

“There were no real visible injuries, and I think it was just coming to grips with what had happened, and the trauma that he went through and saw his fellow students go through,” Ms. Gregg said.

On Friday, a cluster of students gathered on a lawn a few blocks from Otto Miller Hall, where the shootings occurred. Scriptural verses and religious song lyrics were posted on the lawn.

“I think we are finding our refuge in the Lord even when we are in the midst of a time where our physical refuge seems at stake,” Jon Heddles, a 20-year-old journalism major, said as he stood with friends. “We truly believe God is present here.”

Mayor Ed Murray said in a news conference that the shootings, on top of a double homicide in Seattle last weekend, had highlighted profound questions about gun violence to which he admitted he had no ready answers. “We must acknowledge the perverse universality of violence,” Mr. Murray said.

The mayor then heaped still more praise on Mr. Meis.

“Jon Meis stood up, took charge, put his own life at risk and prevented a situation that could have been far more tragic,” Mr. Murray said.

A police spokesman said detectives had established no motive in the attack.

But at the university, which has about 4,000 students, some people who gathered on Friday said they were praying for the suspect as well as the victims.

Hallie Brinkman, a 20-year-old sophomore studying theology and English literature, gathered with friends on Friday — which would have been the last day of classes, though all were canceled — with a copy of the Book of Common Prayer. They had gathered on a patch of lawn to discuss a particular quotation.

Ms. Brinkman opened the book and pointed to the passage. “Forgiveness is the key that unlocks the door of resentment and the handcuffs of hate,” it read. “It is a power that breaks the chains of bitterness and the shackles of selfishness.”

What did the passage mean to her?

“Everyone is shocked and angry,” she said of the campus and the pervasive sense of violation. But at least in her circle of friends, she said, sympathy, charity and forbearance are fighting back. Of the gunman, she said, “I haven’t heard anyone, so far, say anything other than, ‘I feel sorry for the guy.’ ”
