AEMON CANNON is certain about little as he contemplates life after graduation from Santana High School. But one thing the big-limbed, bright young man says he knows for sure is that when he leaves this tough San Diego suburb and enters the University of California at Santa Barbara in the fall, he will join the juggling club. And if there is no juggling club, he will start one, as he did here.

Mr. Cannon, 18, was the valedictorian at Santana's commencement on Thursday, and like the talented young scholars at countless other schools, he struck a gleeful, forward-looking tone in his speech, projecting confidence that cracking the future would be no tougher than learning to juggle flaming torches. Afterward, his classmates whooped behind the gently flapping purple and gold banners of a color guard. The band played Elgar and Sousa.

But the defining moments of this graduation were the quiet ones, the pauses and silences when Mr. Cannon, and so many others packed into the football stadium, were thinking more about the still wrenching uncertainties of the past year than about the future. On the morning of March 5, Mr. Cannon and some friends were chatting in a hallway less than 30 feet from the spot where a student, 15-year-old Charles Andrew Williams, gunned down 15 people in an inexplicable spasm of violence.

The pop-pop of a .22-caliber pistol seemed unreal, even when he clearly saw the young gunman pointing the weapon and firing indiscriminately in his direction, recalled Mr. Cannon, standing in the same spot as on that day three months ago.

Had the gunman's hand drifted just a few inches, it might have been Mr. Cannon memorialized at commencement here along with the two students who did die. The luck that brought him through that moment was as perplexing as a broader question: how the hard red soil of this working-class community and two homes filled with challenges could, in one case, produce a talented young dynamo like Mr. Cannon, whose father drives a truck for a living, and in the other instance help transform another, apparently likable youth into a murderous loner.

The shootings were referred to only obliquely during graduation here, at a stadium under tight security. The principal, Karen Degischer, spoke of the ''adversity'' the students had been through, and described the ceremony for the nearly 370 members of the class of 2001 as ''a time of reflection.'' In his own address, Mr. Cannon admitted to moments of wanting to be coddled like a child, ''because you just weren't ready for how heavy this life can be.''

An articulate young man, Mr. Cannon nonetheless found himself groping during an interview to explain the dark sense that no matter how well you think you may know a person, there are shadowy truths that can explode without reason when, as he put it, ''the curtain comes down.''

''It's kind of like the feeling that you're running and you trip, and you catch yourself just in time,'' he said. ''You think, 'I could have broken my face.' You sort of tingle for a while afterwards, and then the tingling goes away. But you feel like it could happen again.''

MR. CANNON was born and raised in this generally shapeless town, which lies against some craggy hills at the leading edge of San Diego's sprawling growth. He expresses no affection for Santee, but speaks reverently of his parents, who always encouraged him, he says, to cultivate his uniqueness and be self-reliant.

His mother, Carol, says she and her husband, Robert, were both misfits when they were young, people who, she adds, quoting Jefferson Airplane, ''just want somebody to love.'' They found what they were looking for in their marriage and family; Aemon was the third of seven children to whom she has devoted herself. The father has a junk hauling business, but his real passion is playing jazz guitar.

His family does not practice any religion, Mr. Cannon said, and he and his siblings were all told there was no Santa Claus and no spiritual mysteries. Instead they were urged to rely on themselves and their powers of logic. In school, he earned distinctions in every subject, had an A-plus average, won several scholarships and received awards for his paintings.

What was most troubling about the shooting, he said, was the finality of something so random. The idea that some shots squeezed off by an angry young man could mean the loss of one's options and choices seemed so heartless. ''I can't imagine losing that,'' he said.

With the terrible details of the event left unspoken, graduation was a play of symbols, and everyone seemed to be looking for one that would sum it all up, capture the profundity. Perhaps the most heartening of the many thoughts offered came at the end of Mr. Cannon's speech.

In sending his classmates off to the world, he offered them comfort not in some new language that would reflect the extraordinary turn their lives had taken, but in a familiar metaphor, emphasizing how much he and the others still had in common with high school seniors elsewhere.

''Life is a book,'' he boomed into the sound system. ''You are its author. Take care that you write a beautiful story.''
