Five months after his mother was shot to death along with four girls in a schoolyard here, 3-year-old Zane Wright still does not understand where she has gone. His father, Mitchell Wright, will explain it to him when he is old enough, sometime after his seventh birthday.

By then, four years from now, one of the boys accused of murdering Shannon Wright will be free, Mr. Wright said.

''He, Mitchell Johnson, was the one who shot her,'' said Mr. Wright, his voice hot but controlled. Mitchell will turn 14 on Tuesday, the day that he and Andrew Golden, 12, will be tried on murder charges in the shootings on March 24 that left 10 other people wounded at Westside Middle School. Under state law, the boys must be tried as juveniles and, even if found to be ''delinquent,'' they will be released on their 18th birthdays unless they have committed crimes while in detention.

''My son is 3,'' said Mr. Wright, whose wife was an English teacher at Westside. ''And by the time he's old enough to understand what murder is, I have to turn to him and say that the boy who did this is free. That scares me to death.''

Both boys have been charged with the grown-up word ''murder,'' but their day in court, and the punishment they could receive, is purely kid stuff, say family members who lost someone that day. ''In a state like ours,'' Mr. Wright said, ''the value of a human being is based on the age of the ones who murdered her.''

Other people in this diverse college, manufacturing and farming community of 50,000 have a similar sense of hopelessness going into the adjudication hearing -- the juvenile court equivalent of a trial -- in the Craighead County Courthouse in Jonesboro. There seems to be little drama over the outcome -- the boys were caught, quite literally, with the smoking guns -- only a malaise as the people hurt most by the killings prepare for a fresher pain as the day of March 24 is replayed in the courtroom.

And, when it is over, legal experts predict, there will not even be a finding of guilt, at least in the traditional sense of a jury trial. A judge, whose decisions are bound by the state law that requires children under age 14 to be tried as juveniles and sentenced to juvenile detention, can only judge the boys to be ''delinquent,'' and remand them to state custody, and then only until they turn 18.

That means Mitchell would serve four years, and Andrew, who was 11 at the time of the shootings, would serve less than seven.

Mr. Wright said he learned from investigators that Mitchell shot his wife at least twice, in the chest and abdomen, as she shielded terrified students with her body. Instead of running inside the buildings, the police said, she stayed in the line of fire in an effort to get the students away from the killing ground.

''I knew her for 14 years,'' Mr. Wright said of his wife. ''For 12 years, I woke up to her.''

How does he explain to his son the wrongness of it, the meanness of it, he wonders, knowing that the boy who pulled the trigger faces only a four-year sentence, less than other criminals can get for snatching a purse, let alone a life?

''It eats you alive,'' Mr. Wright said.

Relatives of the dead children have tried to ready themselves for what is expected to happen in the juvenile court setting that was never intended to handle a case of such magnitude. Because the judge imposed an order restricting the lawyers from talking about the case, neither the boys' public defenders nor prosecutors can say what they expect the hearing to be like. It is expected to last, at most, for a few days.

Many people here hope that the boys plead guilty, and shorten the amount of pain the hearing will create. Yet no matter what the outcome, the judge cannot hand down a sentence of a specific time. He can only have the boys remanded to a state facility for juvenile delinquents.

Theoretically, the boys, if found guilty, could be released before their 18th birthdays, if they showed psychological improvements and if they behaved themselves.

''You approach juvenile justice on the premise that rehabilitation is still possible,'' said Joe Quinn, a spokesman for the Arkansas Department of Human Resources, which oversees juvenile detention.

But when asked whether he thought the boys could get out early for good behavior, he replied: ''I see that as zero possibility. Zero.''

For the murders of five people, the boys would live out their time in a facility with a classroom, a library and computers, probably in the Alexander Youth Services Center near Little Rock, Ark. Ringed with barbed wire, it houses about 25 juveniles.

On their 18th birthdays, the boys would leave. There are no options, under state law, unless they commit a crime while inside the facility.

''We've accepted the fact that the law is the way that it is,'' said Regina Kaut, whose niece, 11-year-old Britthney Varner, was killed on that day. ''We know, logically and intellectually, what's going to take place.''

But, ''when we actually have to face that, I don't know how we're going to deal with that,'' Ms. Kaut said. ''I don't think about the boys a lot. And, I don't spend time being bitter or wishing them ill will. It's not constructive and it's not in my personality.'' She hopes it will be that way in court when she looks into their faces.

''We'll always ask ourselves how two little boys could have done this. And there's never going to be an answer,'' Ms. Kaut said.

Long after the boys are free, people here will still be finding scraps of memory in cedar chests and photo albums.

''Little things sneak up on you,'' Britthney's aunt said. ''You think things are going well emotionally and you find a card.'' She said Britthney's mother, Suzann Wilson, ''found a Valentine card while looking for something else. Those little things bring it back to you, that she's really gone. That was the last Valentine card she'll get.''

Mrs. Wilson, in a tearful appeal to the Arkansas Legislature recently, asked for changes in the state law. ''I'm not advocating the death penalty for these boys,'' she told the lawmakers. But, she said, a few years of confinement is not justice.

In Jonesboro, people grit their teeth, not just at the pain the boys are alleged to have caused, but at the way they have reportedly behaved in the detention facility. The boys, being boys, have asked for soft drinks and junk food instead of the meats and vegetables that are served.

They have complained to their jailers and parents that they are being mistreated by not being allowed to play outside like the other boys, although sheriff's department officials have explained that that is only because there have been so many death threats.

To people here, it is as if the boys insist on having things that other boys have, and do not understand why they cannot have them. That cheapens the lives of the people they killed, said Mr. Wright, a sales representative who has found getting back to the routine of life -- work, getting his son up in the mornings, among other things -- still hard six months later.

The two boys, dressed in camouflage, were arrested not far from the school where, investigators say, they set off a fire alarm to lure students and teachers into the schoolyard. Then, the investigators say, the boys opened fire on their schoolmates with hunting rifles.

The alleged motive: They had said they were mad about being teased, and one boy, Mitchell, reportedly was angry because he had been rejected by a girlfriend.

Killed were Mrs. Wright, Britthney, and three other girls: Stephanie Johnson, 12, Paige Ann Herring, 12, and Natalie Brooks, 11.

Their deaths have prompted Arkansas to reconsider the age limit at which children can be charged as adults, but any changes will not affect the boys.

The state has one loophole, but it is a narrow one. Technically, the boys could be held until age 21, under existing laws, if there was a facility to hold them. The state does not have such a place, and the boys cannot, by law, be put in a prison for adults. The state could build such a facility, Mr. Quinn said, and try to keep the boys longer, ''but there would be some legal questions.''

That scenario is unlikely. The other, more likely one is almost unbearable for the families of some of the victims. But there is no choice.

''It's a messed-up world,'' Mr. Wright said.

His wife was honored by former President George Bush on Thursday in Little Rock with a special hero's award. When asked by a reporter what he would say to the boys if he had a chance, Mr. Wright replied, ''If it had been them'' standing terrified in the schoolyard as the bullets flew, ''she would have been protecting them.''
