Just days before his trial was to begin, Kipland P. Kinkel, the Oregon teen-ager who went on a shooting rampage last year, killing his parents and then two students at his school, abandoned his insanity defense today and pleaded guilty to the charges.

If convicted at a trial, Mr. Kinkel, who was 15 years old at the time of the shootings and is now 17, could have faced life in prison without any chance of parole.

He will now be sentenced by a judge, who could give the teen-ager as little as 25 years in prison or add on 7 1/2 years for each of the 26 counts of attempted murder he faced for shooting up his school cafeteria a year ago last May and later attacking a detective.

This morning, in a courtroom in Eugene, Ore., Mr. Kinkel signed a plea agreement, initialing ''KK'' next to each paragraph. One read, in part: ''My mind is clear and I am not sick.''

Mr. Kinkel thus confessed to killing 16-year-old Ben Walker and Mikael Nickolauson, 17, wounding 22 students and shooting at three other students at Thurston High School in Springfield, Ore., after he had killed his parents, Bill and Faith Kinkel, at his home. He also confessed to attacking the detective after his arrest.

On May 21, 1998, minutes before the morning bell rang, Mr. Kinkel started firing a semiautomatic rifle, spraying the cafeteria with about 50 rounds in a minute and a half before some of the students managed to wrestle him to the floor. There were 300 to 400 students in the cafeteria at the time.

Taken to jail, Mr. Kinkel attacked the detective with a knife taped to his leg, and later begged police officers: ''Just kill me. Just shoot me.''

The shootings in Oregon were part of a series of killings in schools by students in the last two years that have shocked and sickened people across the country. It followed similar shootings in Pearl, Miss., West Paducah, Ky., and Jonesboro, Ark., and preceded by a year the killing of 12 students and a teacher at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo. The two gunmen, both students, then killed themselves.

Mr. Kinkel was briefly placed on suicide watch after the Columbine shootings, with law-enforcement officials at his jail saying he blamed himself for what he believed was a copycat crime.

The courtroom in Eugene today was full of survivors of the shooting and relatives of the two students who were killed. Among those attending was a Thurston student, Tony Case, who was shot twice in the back and once in the leg during the rampage, and who later told a throng of reporters outside the courtroom that he was partly relieved to be spared the ordeal of a trial, and partly disappointed to be deprived of the answers it might have brought.

''I guess I'd like to know, you know, why he did it,'' Mr. Case said. ''Really, we're never going to find out.''

Asked what sentence he believes his former schoolmate deserved, Mr. Case said: ''Anywhere over 75, 80 years, he's probably not going to live to get out of prison. So anything along that line is quite enough for me.''

F. Douglass Harcleroad, the Lane County District Attorney, said outside the courtroom this morning that the plea was ''the best thing for the community'' but he declined to discuss specifics of how the plea was reached, citing a judge's order preventing lawyers from discussing the case.

Mr. Harcleroad said survivors would be able to speak in court before Mr. Kinkel was sentenced.

Oregon has a death penalty law, but because Mr. Kinkel was only 15 at the time of the shooting he was not eligible to be sentenced to execution.

In many ways, the teen-ager's reasons for his violent rampage remain unfathomable. According to court papers, he told police investigators that he felt he had ''no choice'' but to kill, and he later elaborated to psychiatrist: ''I had to be 100 percent. No one is perfect, though. Lots of times, life sucked. With my parents, if I didn't do the best, I was an embarrassment to my parents.''

And at a court hearing earlier this year, Alan Warthen, a police detective, said: ''When he was explaining how he killed his mother -- he just went off. He started talking about a voice in his head. He started banging his head against the wall a couple of times. I put my hand on his shoulder and said, 'Kip, calm down.' ''

Mr. Kinkel's lawyers had indicated that they planned to argue in court that he bore diminished responsibility for the shootings because he was mentally deranged. With his signature on the plea today, Mr. Kinkel abandoned that defense. Had he been found not guilty by reason of insanity, he would have been committed to a mental hospital until he was no longer deemed a threat to society.

Sentencing, which has not yet been scheduled, will be determined by Judge Jack Mattison of Lane County Circuit Court.

In the plea announced today, prosecutors said they would recommend that the murder sentences run concurrently, and that they would take no position on whether the sentences for attempted murder should run consecutively.

With the trial scheduled to start next Monday, lawyers for Mr. Kinkel had argued in recent days that tapes of Mr. Kinkel's jailhouse conversations with relatives, friends and ministers should not be allowed as trial evidence.

Prosecutors had defended the recordings and their use in a trial: ''There is no expectation of privacy in a jail setting,'' Assistant District Attorney Kent Mortimore argued.

Earlier this year, the judge did approve a defense motion for a delay in the trial until September, saying he wanted to ''get it done once and get it done right.''

