A second victim of a gunman's shooting spree at an elementary school died today, a few hours after students and teachers returned to class for the first time since Monday.

The man accused in the shootings at Oakland Elementary School said in an interview published today that he was copying a similar act by a woman in Winnetka, Ill.

The gunman, James William Wilson, 19 years old, also said that as he pulled the trigger of his grandfather's .22-caliber pistol, he was remembering being ridiculed by classmates at other schools for being overweight and dressing funny, The State newspaper of Columbia, S. C. reported today. Another Murder Charge Added

A second murder charge was filed against Mr. Wilson this afternoon after 8-year-old Tequila Thomas, a third-grader who had been in critical condition since she was wounded, died shortly after noon at Self Memorial Hospital, said Dan Branyon, a hospital spokesman.

''Tequila never regained consciousness from the time of her arrival,'' Mr. Branyon said.

Another 8-year-old, Shequila Bradley, died at the school Monday. Two teachers who were wounded remained hospitalized today, and one of six students treated and released was admitted today, complaining of discomfort from her wounds.

Continue reading the main story
Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

This morning Leah Holmes, 8, her arm in a sling from a gunshot wound she suffered Monday, shook her head emphatically and replied ''nope'' when she was asked if she feared returning to school. But other children and parents arriving at the school said they were nervous.

There was a police officer on every corner of the school grounds and at least three officers were stationed at the front of the building as parents and children arrived.

Mr. Wilson, who is charged with murder, was interviewed Wednesday by the newspaper by telephone at the State Hospital in Columbia, where he is undergoing psychological testing. Relatives have described him as a hyperactive recluse who has been in and out of a hospital psychiatric unit during the last eight months. Thought 'Students Were After Me'

Witnesses said Mr. Wilson shot pupils who screamed. ''I thought some of the students in the school were after me,'' Mr. Wilson was quoted as saying in the interview. ''I was trying to make them be quiet. I feel real bad about what happened.''

On May 20, Laurie Dann killed an 8-year-old boy and wounded six people in and around a school in the affluent Chicago suburb of Winnetka before killing herself, the authorities reported.

''I could understand where she was coming from,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''I think I may have copied her in a way.''

He said he was thinking about an article about Miss Dann that he had torn from a June issue of People magazine. ''I read it every day,'' he said. Little Remembered Mr. Wilson was also quoted in the article as saying he had been up all night before the shootings, reading a book about John Wayne Gacy, who was convicted in 1980 of killing 33 men and boys, most of whom were buried under a suburban Chicago house. Mr. Gacy is on death row in an Illinois prison.

The article quoted Mr. Wilson as saying he remembered little of the shootings: ''It was like a fog or a dream. I remember being at the back of the school with my hands up and the police arresting me. I don't remember feeling anything.''
