Carl M. Henderson and his girlfriend had been looking forward to their first high school homecoming on Friday, but their plans were dashed when city officials accused some of their classmates of planning a violent act at the school.

''She was going to wear a cream-colored dress, with little sparkles and a slit in the leg,'' said Carl, a ninth grader, as he sat on his front porch on Saturday and thought about what might have been. ''She looked pretty,'' he said with a sigh.

But homecoming, that high school rite of passage, was a victim of what many fear could have been a Columbine-style shooting spree at South High School here. Mayor Michael R. White announced on Thursday that ''there was an alleged plan to commit some sort of violent act at the school'' on homecoming day, so classes were canceled on Friday, along with the homecoming football game and dance. Four students were arrested, and police and school officials questioned seven more.

At a preliminary hearing today, a magistrate accepted pleas of denial from the four boys, but ordered that they continue to be held in detention, at least until a judge is assigned to their cases, which typically takes a few days, said Len P. Munks, superintendent of the Cuyahoga County Juvenile Detention Center. The magistrate considered what was best for the four as well as ''what is in the best interest of the public for security,'' Mr. Munks said.

The court has not named the boys because they are juveniles. One is 14 and three are 15.

Sarah Jedd, 15, one of the students questioned in the case and a friend of the four boys, said the boys had laughed about the April killings at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., and had planned to imitate that massacre at South High, ending with a suicidal shootout.

''They were going to stand in a circle and just open fire,'' said Sarah, who told her mother of the plan on Wednesday. Another girl had already told school officials of the plot by the time Sarah's mother alerted the authorities.

It remains unclear how serious the teenagers were. No weapons were found with the students who were questioned. The police confiscated two guns from the home of one of the four teenagers arrested but found no weapons at the school.

''They searched floor by floor, room by room and locker by locker, and they didn't find any guns, any explosives or any contraband of any sort,'' said Lt. Edward Thiery of the Cleveland Police Department.

City officials have said they will not take any chances with school threats. ''There is going to be zero tolerance,'' Mr. White said last week. South High is scheduled to reopen on Monday with metal detectors and a heavy police presence.

News of the alleged plot -- and the mayor's unexplained contention that race was a factor in it -- has riveted the city, worrying parents and students and dividing neighbor from neighbor. Most South High students are African-American; all 11 students questioned are white. Mr. White refused to elaborate on his comments this weekend.

The consensus among a cross-section of students interviewed was that the 11 students were outcasts who were often picked on. White students scoffed at the idea that race had been a motive, while black students believed that it was.

''They always got made fun of, but they didn't have to go out like this and shoot people,'' said Pat Sender, 16, a white 11th grader.

The news shocked Carl's mother, Rhonda J. Henderson, who is black. ''I do want to thank the other girl for coming forward because I would be burying my child today,'' Ms. Henderson, 36, a medical assistant, said as she tended her garden on Saturday. Homecoming has been rescheduled for Monday, but her son is not sure he wants to go.

Two of the students questioned live next door. ''If you knew about it, why didn't you come and tell me,'' Ms. Henderson asked of her neighbors. ''Do you want me to moan for my son?''

But the two neighbors, Timothy J. Braddock, 14, and his sister, Tabatha, 15, insisted that they knew nothing about any plan and had seen their reputations ruined.

''I used to walk down the street and everybody waved at me,'' Tabatha said, as tears streamed down her cheeks. Now, when neighbors see her, they shout ''K.K.K.,'' she said. Tabatha insisted that she was not a racist and said, ''We didn't have nothing to do with this.''

Several other students said they no longer felt safe at South High. And many said they were upset that officials had been forced to cancel homecoming.

Doreena M. Hupcej, 15, planned to pull on a bright red dress and leave her 2-year-old son with his grandmother while she went to the dance. ''My plans were ruined,'' said Doreena, a ninth grader. ''I stayed home and watched 'Casper.' ''

But the childish antics of the friendly television ghost could not keep Doreena from grown-up worries. She pointed to her son and asked, ''If something would happen to me, who would take care of him?''
