Amid talk of installing metal detectors at the school doors and in the first day of a new policy of searching students' backpacks for guns, a still-puzzled county sheriff wondered out loud whether the 14-year-old boy who killed three of his classmates in an early-morning prayer circle acted alone, or expected help.

After the shooting on Monday morning at Heath High School that left three girls dead and five other students wounded, Sheriff Frank Augustus of McCracken County said that the ninth-grader who confessed to the shootings, Michael Carneal, might not have known himself why he carried out the assault.

But today, the sheriff and others wondered about a possibility that few here want to believe: What if Michael, who carried five guns into the school, expected someone else to join in the attack in the school lobby?

Or, at least, what if someone else helped plan it? The sheriff said he had no evidence that Michael had any help or expected any, but gut instinct made him suspicious.

''I may be totally out of whack here,'' the sheriff said, ''but I believe there's someone else involved.''

In front of some 40 students, Michael, who has confessed, shot the students with a .22-caliber semiautomatic pistol after they had just finished a prayer meeting.

But Michael also had with him four other guns -- two shotguns and two .22-caliber rifles -- hidden in a blanket wrapped with duct tape. He had told a suspicious teacher that the bundle was part of a science project.

Why would the boy have smuggled in so many guns, unless he expected to share them with an accomplice, or accomplices, the sheriff wondered. ''I don't believe this boy planned this out by himself,'' Sheriff Augustus said. ''I believe there's someone else out there we need to talk to. I believe it's another student.''

But when pressed as to what leads the investigators were following, the sheriff and others said they had nothing beyond hunches.

Michael has been charged with three slayings, attempted murder and burglary. He stole the guns from a neighbor, who did not even know they were missing.

People here still searched their minds and memories for a motive.

A search of Michael's room found nothing to show that he was anything except what he appeared to be: an unexceptional student who friends said dressed like everyone else, listened to the same music and played in the school band. He had been kidded by other students because he was a little small, but most said that was apparently nothing beyond the usual teen-age banter.

But the principal of the high school, Bill Bond, said Michael's essays and short stories indicated that he ''just struck out in anger at the world'' because he felt weak and picked upon. Mr. Bond said the boy apparently ''had been teased all his life.'' But the principal said he did not know of any incidents in which Michael had been physically harassed.

The young man credited with stopping the shooting spree before it got worse wondered if he could have saved lives if he had acted sooner.

Many students thought the gunfire was firecrackers or stink bombs or some other prank, but the young man, Benjamin Strong, the leader of the prayer group, said, ''Once I realized it was real, I did what I could.''

He walked up to the boy, after he had squeezed off about 12 rounds into the prayer circle, and told him to ''stop shooting people.''

''Your body kind of freezes up in a situation like that,'' said Mr. Strong, a football player and son of a pastor. He said that perhaps he should have run over and tackled the boy.

After the shootings, he told his father: ''Dad, I feel guilty. ''I didn't react quickly enough.''

His father, Bobby Strong, told him: ''You did all you could do.''

His mother, Doris Strong, said, ''I was in bed and someone called and said there's been a shooting at Heath, and it went through my mind that Ben would try to do something to stop it. That thought didn't comfort me.''

As Mr. Strong led the prayer circle at the school on Tuesday, as he did on Monday morning, there was at least one thing to be grateful for.

The lungs of one girl killed in the attack, Nicole Hadley, 14, were donated to a 42-year-old man, Thomas Hereford, who now has a new chance at life. Mr. Hereford, of Jeffersonville, Ind., had severe emphysema and was not expected to live much longer, family members said. He received the girl's lungs, and was in serious but stable condition this afternoon at Jewish Hospital in Louisville. Nicole's heart, kidneys, liver and pancreas were also donated.

The girls' funerals will be on Friday.
