WOODBRIDGE, Va. — A community college student who opened fire on his math professor in a crowded classroom Tuesday was arraigned Wednesday on charges of attempted murder and discharging a firearm in a school zone.

No one was injured in the shooting, which took place at one of the campuses of the state’s largest university system, but it rattled a region where memories linger of the 2007 Virginia Tech shooting shootings in which 32 people were killed.

The Prince William County police said Wednesday morning that they finished inspecting the school and interviewing the female teacher, who was the target of the shooting and whose name was not released.

The police identified the shooter as Jason Michael Hamilton, 20. He was being held without bond at the Prince William Regional Adult Detention Center and will remain there until his Jan. 11 court date, according to a county police spokeswoman, Kim Chinn.

Ms. Chinn said the shooting took place around 2:40 p.m. Tuesday at the Northern Virginia Community College in Woodbridge, about 25 miles south of Washington, D.C.

Mr. Hamilton entered the classroom with a high-powered rifle and when he cocked his weapon the teacher yelled to students to take cover, the police said.

Students immediately sprinted from the classroom and the teacher ducked under a desk, the police said. After firing at least two shots, Mr. Hamilton laid down his weapon, walked into the hallway and calmly sat on a chair until the police arrived to arrest him.

“The frustrating part was that no one really knew what we were supposed to do,” said Michelle Wittkoff, 43, who was sitting in a sociology class on the third floor of the building when the shooting began on the floor above. She said she didn’t hear the shots but was soon alerted by another student who entered her classroom. “Do we wait here? Do we stay? Do we run out of the building?” Ms. Wittkoff said. “We had no idea.”

She said that as students and her sociology professor wandered down the hall, another faculty member told them that she believed everyone was supposed to stay in place. The students then returned to their classroom and looked out the window to see the police with guns drawn. Soon after, Mr. Hamilton was ushered from the building in handcuffs, Ms. Wittkoff said.

“We didn’t get a text message and there was no message over the intercom for at least an hour,” Ms. Wittkoff said.

But Carlene Mackareth, a spokeswoman for the university, said that the school’s 8,500 students and staff members were notified via text messages, the Internet and phone calls. The first text alert went out at 2:54 p.m. and the intercom announcement occurred at 2:55 p.m.

“I don’t know what might have happened with that classroom or that group,” Ms. Mackareth said.

Northern Virginia Community College has about 67,000 students, roughly 9,700 of whom take classes at the Woodbridge campus. The college has six campuses, and is the state’s largest institution of higher learning, in terms of enrollment.

On Wednesday, the Woodbridge campus remained closed.

At Mr. Hamilton’s home, in an affluent section of Dale City, several police cruisers idled nearby, and officers waved reporters away.

One neighbor, who asked not to be identified, said the family was “very kind.”

He said of Mr. Hamilton: “He was not a kid you would see chatting or hanging out with others. He kept to himself. I wasn’t even sure if he lived here anymore, actually.”
